--- 
layout: post
title: Rethinking Collaboration in the Humanities
meta-description: 
--- 

Lately we have heard a lot about the importance of collaboration in the humanities. The messengers who bring this news tell us in the same breath that humanists are both inexperienced in and resistant to collaborative work. According to them, it isn’t just that our provosts’ hidebound tenure standards preclude any savvy junior faculty from even dipping a toe into the pool of exciting new collaborative work. The problem, they imply, is much larger.  It is that, at bottom, scholars working in humanities fields hate people. Otherwise, we would be happily working in cheerful teams to solve the world’s problems, as scientists do.

And so we have the collaborative carrots - new centers for collaborative humanities research, new grants and fellowships aimed at encouraging us to give collaboration a try.  And we have the collaborative sticks – articles promising that without collaborative work the humanities will vanish into thin air, blog post after blog post imploring humanists to give collaboration a chance. It will hurt a lot, we’re told; it will force us to radically change our outdated, Romantic, solitary, introverted nature; but it will be good for us. The digital humanities in particular tend to telegraph this message: get on board with a bright new collaborative technological future or get left behind, paging quietly through your copy of Shelley, fountain pen in hand, as the world moves relentlessly forward without you. 

But is collaborative humanities work truly new? 

Evidence suggests not. In fact, if we track collaboration by co-authorship, bibliometric data suggests that humanists have enjoyed a long, if modest, history of both producing and valuing co-authored work.  Over the last sixty years, humanists have co-authored journal articles at an estimated steady rate of 10%; some studies suggest a slight rise in recent years. Perhaps even more significant, citation studies show that these co-authored articles are not slighted in favor of single-authored publications; humanists are in fact statistically slightly more likely to read and refer to co-authored publications than single-authored ones.  

So while co-authored work will not get humanists tenure, by all accounts, they may be heartened to know that despite such institutionalized discouragement, co-authorship persists as a low-grade but constantly present practice in the publication of humanities research. And it may also be cheering for humanists to learn that their colleagues, despite all we hear about the average humanist’s fear and hatred of collaboration, are just as likely to read and cite co-authored articles - and always have been. If humanists have a cultural prejudice against collaboration generally or co-authored work specifically, they do not express it in their citation practices. 

By contrast, scientists have only recently come to privilege co-authored work.  Sixty years ago, the most important, highly-cited science papers were more likely to have been written by single authors; today those same highly-cited papers are much more likely to have been written by a team.  So although scientists have always co-authored more than humanists, it seems that in the past they used to discriminate against co-authored work.  Only lately has what we might interpret as a cultural preference for co-authored work emerged in the sciences, a contrast to the humanities fields’ uninterrupted acceptance of co-authored work.

But while this story about humanists’ low-level but always-present practices of co-authorship reveals one small dimension of collaborative humanities work, a narrow focus on co-authorship actually conceals the full, rich, range of collaborative work in the humanities.  For unlike the sciences <link: http://chronicle.com/article/Lets-Clarify-Authorship-on/148287/>, most important contributors to humanities research never receive the imprimatur of authorship. From the dissertation writing group to the advanced seminar, from your friend’s heavy editing of your book chapter to your advisor’s gift of his annotated bibliography, from your freshman comp students to a famous rare books curator’s radical reshaping of your research project’s canon, collaboration is at the core of humanities work.  Alongside these warmer moments of often under-acknowledged collaboration, many of us also remember more painful ones: finding your ideas resurfacing in the work of your professor, your peer, your student; receiving a spiteful yet incisive anonymous review requiring you to rewrite your first book manuscript.  Despite the prevalence of the single author’s name on the article or book title page, the majority of humanities work involves significant collaboration  - both pleasurable and painful. 

The evidence of this kind of collaboration can seem marginal and fleeting, even if its practices centrally shape humanists’ work. How can we make humanities collaboration more visible  - so that we can ground our conversations in native disciplinary expertise and longstanding practices rather than the shallow and baseless assertions of collaboration enthusiasts, however well-meaning?

Converting the marginal traces of humanities collaboration into measurable data offers one path -- a way of counting contributions in order to make them count more. For instance, Blaise Cronin, Kathryn La Barre, and Debora Shaw have begun the work of codifying humanities collaboration by indexing the acknowledgements sections of books in the humanities. Their work pushes aside the classic assertion of autonomous authorship that inevitably appears at the end of such acknowledgements  -- “any mistakes are of course my own” -- turning our attention back instead to the long catalogue of colleagues, friends, and loved ones whose shaping influence can now be memorialized as metrical form. 

New metrics like these could upend existing hierarchies entirely. Suddenly, people credited by myriad acknowledgements sections but with few publications of their own would shoot to the top of the citation standings.  Such a re-jiggering could even draw non-scholars into Google Scholar: babies, dogs, significant others, parents, and high school History teachers would suddenly take their rightful places alongside that famous biochemist who, having once co-applied with you for a grant long ago, now appears in the middle ranks of a long list of authors of an unrelated paper. 

What would the histories of our disciplines look like if all of these hidden collaborators suddenly emerged into the spotlight? Here lies another path: new archival studies and new narratives about our past practices of knowledge production, teaching, and administration.  In English Literature, to take just one discipline as an example, this path leads us to the story of how T.S. Eliot collaborated not just with Ezra Pound on The Waste Land, but also with his extension school students in Southall on their “Elizabethan Literature” syllabus -- the genesis for Eliot’s famous 1920 book of essays, The Sacred Wood.  

Here, too, we find the whole history of scholarly editing in pairs and groups and teams. (As its practitioners know, the new team-based practice of digital editing in scholarly labs and even undergraduate classrooms has a continuous history bridging print and digital media.) Here, too, we find the stories of early twentieth-century female scholars -- like Caroline Spurgeon, Hoxie Neale Fairchild, and Edith Rickert -- who worked with teams of specialists to identify multiple instances of words, imagery, and references across texts. (Then dismissed as librarian-ish bean counters, today they look like pioneer distant readers with literary labs of their own.)  In the archive we even find the detritus of past calls for humanists to give up their creaky solitude or dangerous charisma for a bright new future of group work; a 1941 press release for Hampton University’s Communication Center describes how it eliminates “traditional and dry classroom work in English and several other allied subjects,” replacing them with a “new, progressive workshop.” 

All of these hidden humanities collaborations, whether revealed by qualitative or quantitative methods, point to the same place: the long, native histories of working practices too often presented to us as new and alien.  Let’s work -- together! -- to conserve and study and learn from the evidence of our own working together.

